# Electron Configurations

Having introduced the basics of atomic structure and quantum mechanics, we can use our understanding of quantum numbers to determine how atomic orbitals relate to one another. This allows us to determine which orbitals are occupied by electrons in each atom. The specific arrangement of electrons in orbitals of an atom determines many of the chemical properties of that atom.

# Orbital Energies and Atomic Structure

The energy of atomic orbitals increases as the principal quantum number, $n$, increases. In any atom with two or more electrons, the repulsion between the electrons makes energies of subshells with different values of $l$ differ so that the energy of the orbitals increases within a shell in the order $s < p < d < f$. 

Electrons in successive atoms on the periodic table tend to fill low-energy orbitals first. As the principal quantum number, $n$, increases, the size of the orbital increases and the electrons spend more time farther from the nucleus. Thus, the attraction to the nucleus is weaker and the energy associated with the orbital is higher (less stabilized). But this is not the only effect we have to take into account. Within each shell, as the value of $l$ increases, the electrons are less penetrating (meaning there is less electron density found close to the nucleus), in the order $s > p > d > f$. Electrons that are closer to the nucleus slightly repel electrons that are farther out, offsetting the more dominant electron–nucleus attractions slightly (recall that all electrons have $-1$ charges, but nuclei have $+Z$ charges). This phenomenon is called shielding and will be discussed in more detail in the next section. Electrons in orbitals that experience more shielding are less stabilized and thus higher in energy. For small orbitals (1s through 3p), the increase in energy due to $n$ is more significant than the increase due to $l$; however, for larger orbitals the two trends are comparable and cannot be simply predicted.

The arrangement of electrons in the orbitals of an atom is called the **electron configuration** of the atom. We describe an electron configuration with a symbol that contains three pieces of information:

- The number of the principal quantum shell, $n$,
- The letter that designates the orbital type (the subshell, $l$), and
- A superscript number that designates the number of electrons in that particular subshell.

For example, the notation $2p^4$ (read "two–p–four") indicates four electrons in a $p$ subshell ($l = 1$) with a principal quantum number ($n$) of 2. The notation $3d^8$ (read "three–d–eight") indicates eight electrons in the $d$ subshell (i.e., $l = 2$) of the principal shell for which $n = 3$.

# The Aufbau Principle

To determine the electron configuration for any particular atom, we can “build” the structures in the order of atomic numbers. Beginning with hydrogen, and continuing across the periods of the periodic table, we add one proton at a time to the nucleus and one electron to the proper subshell until we have described the electron configurations of all the elements. This procedure is called the Aufbau principle, from the German word Aufbau (“to build up”). Each added electron occupies the subshell of lowest energy available, subject to the limitations imposed by the allowed quantum numbers according to the Pauli exclusion principle. Electrons enter higher-energy subshells only after lower-energy subshells have been filled to capacity.

We will now construct the ground-state electron configuration and orbital diagram for a selection of atoms in the first and second periods of the periodic table. Orbital diagrams are pictorial representations of the electron configuration, showing the individual orbitals and the pairing arrangement of electrons.

- **Hydrogen (atomic number 1):** One proton and one electron. The electron is in the $1s$ orbital. By convention, the $m_s = +\frac{1}{2}$ value is usually filled first. The electron configuration and the orbital diagram are:

  Electron configuration: $1s^1$

  Orbital diagram: one square labeled $1s$ containing a single upward pointing half arrow.

- **Helium (atomic number 2):** Two protons and two electrons. Both electrons occupy the $1s$ orbital with opposite spins, in accord with the Pauli exclusion principle.

  Electron configuration: $1s^2$

  Orbital diagram: one square labeled $1s$ containing a pair of half arrows, one pointing up and the other down.

- **Lithium (atomic number 3):** The first two electrons fill the $1s$ orbital. The third electron occupies the next lowest energy orbital, the $2s$ orbital.

  Electron configuration: $1s^2 2s^1$

  Orbital diagram: two squares labeled $1s$ and $2s$. The $1s$ square contains a pair of half arrows; the $2s$ square contains a single upward pointing arrow.

- **Beryllium (atomic number 4):** Four electrons; the fourth electron fills the remaining space in the $2s$ orbital.

  Electron configuration: $1s^2 2s^2$

  Orbital diagram: two squares labeled $1s$ and $2s$, each containing a pair of half arrows.

- **Boron (atomic number 5):** Five electrons; the $n=1$ shell is filled with two electrons, and three electrons occupy the $n=2$ shell. The fifth electron must occupy the next energy level, a $2p$ orbital. There are three degenerate $2p$ orbitals ($m_l = -1, 0, +1$), and the electron can occupy any one of these.

  Electron configuration: $1s^2 2s^2 2p^1$

  Orbital diagram: two individual squares labeled $1s$ and $2s$ (each with paired arrows), followed by three connected squares labeled $2p$, with the first containing a single upward pointing arrow.

- **Carbon (atomic number 6):** Six electrons; four fill the $1s$ and $2s$ orbitals, and the remaining two electrons occupy the $2p$ subshell. According to Hund’s rule, the two electrons occupy separate degenerate $2p$ orbitals with parallel spins.

  Electron configuration: $1s^2 2s^2 2p^2$

  Orbital diagram: two individual squares labeled $1s$ and $2s$ (each with paired arrows), followed by three connected squares labeled $2p$, with the first two containing single upward pointing arrows.

- **Nitrogen (atomic number 7):** Fills the $1s$ and $2s$ subshells and has one electron in each of the three $2p$ orbitals, all unpaired.

  Electron configuration: $1s^2 2s^2 2p^3$

- **Oxygen (atomic number 8):** Has a pair of electrons in one $2p$ orbital and a single electron in each of the other two.

  Electron configuration: $1s^2 2s^2 2p^4$

- **Fluorine (atomic number 9):** Has only one $2p$ orbital containing an unpaired electron.

  Electron configuration: $1s^2 2s^2 2p^5$

- **Neon (atomic number 10):** All electrons are paired, and all orbitals in the $n=1$ and $n=2$ shells are filled.

  Electron configuration: $1s^2 2s^2 2p^6$

The alkali metal **sodium** (atomic number 11) has one more electron than neon. This electron goes into the lowest-energy subshell available, the $3s$ orbital, giving a $1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^1$ configuration. The electrons occupying the outermost shell orbital(s) (highest value of $n$) are called **valence electrons**, and those occupying the inner shell orbitals are called **core electrons**. Since the core electron shells correspond to noble gas electron configurations, we can abbreviate electron configurations by writing the noble gas that matches the core electron configuration, along with the valence electrons in a condensed format. For sodium, the symbol [Ne] represents core electrons ($1s^2 2s^2 2p^6$), and the abbreviated configuration is [Ne]$3s^1$.

Similarly, the abbreviated configuration of lithium can be represented as [He]$2s^1$, where [He] represents the configuration of the helium atom, which is identical to that of the filled inner shell of lithium. Writing the configurations in this way emphasizes the similarity of the configurations of lithium and sodium. Both atoms, which are in the alkali metal family, have only one electron in a valence $s$ subshell outside a filled set of inner shells.

\[
\text{Li: } [\text{He}] 2s^1
\]
\[
\text{Na: } [\text{Ne}] 3s^1
\]

The alkaline earth metal **magnesium** (atomic number 12), with its 12 electrons in a [Ne]$3s^2$ configuration, is analogous to its family member beryllium, [He]$2s^2$. Both atoms have a filled $s$ subshell outside their filled inner shells. Aluminum (atomic number 13), with 13 electrons and the electron configuration [Ne]$3s^2 3p^1$, is analogous to its family member boron, [He]$2s^2 2p^1$.

The electron configurations of silicon (14 electrons), phosphorus (15 electrons), sulfur (16 electrons), chlorine (17 electrons), and argon (18 electrons) are analogous in the electron configurations of their outer shells to their corresponding family members carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, and neon, respectively, except that the principal quantum number of the outer shell of the heavier elements has increased by one to $n = 3$.

When we come to the next element in the periodic table, the alkali metal **potassium** (atomic number 19), we might expect that we would begin to add electrons to the $3d$ subshell. However, all available chemical and physical evidence indicates that potassium is like lithium and sodium, and that the next electron is not added to the $3d$ level but is, instead, added to the $4s$ level. Thus, potassium has an electron configuration of [Ar]$4s^1$. Hence, potassium corresponds to Li and Na in its valence shell configuration. The next electron is added to complete the $4s$ subshell and calcium has an electron configuration of [Ar]$4s^2$. This gives calcium an outer-shell electron configuration corresponding to that of beryllium and magnesium.

Beginning with the transition metal **scandium** (atomic number 21), additional electrons are added successively to the $3d$ subshell. This subshell is filled to its capacity with 10 electrons (remember that for $l = 2$ [$d$ orbitals], there are $2l + 1 = 5$ values of $m_l$, meaning that there are five $d$ orbitals that have a combined capacity of 10 electrons). The $4p$ subshell fills next. Note that for three series of elements, scandium (Sc) through copper (Cu), yttrium (Y) through silver (Ag), and lutetium (Lu) through gold (Au), a total of 10 $d$ electrons are successively added to the $(n - 1)$ shell next to the $n$ shell to bring that $(n - 1)$ shell from 8 to 18 electrons. For two series, lanthanum (La) through lutetium (Lu) and actinium (Ac) through lawrencium (Lr), 14 $f$ electrons ($l = 3$, $2l + 1 = 7$ $m_l$ values; thus, seven orbitals with a combined capacity of 14 electrons) are successively added to the $(n - 2)$ shell to bring that shell from 18 electrons to a total of 32 electrons.

# Example 3.10: Quantum Numbers and Electron Configurations

**What is the electron configuration and orbital diagram for a phosphorus atom? What are the four quantum numbers for the last electron added?**

**Solution**

The atomic number of phosphorus is 15. Thus, a phosphorus atom contains 15 electrons. The order of filling of the energy levels is $1s$, $2s$, $2p$, $3s$, $3p$, $4s$, ... The 15 electrons of the phosphorus atom will fill up to the $3p$ orbital, which will contain three electrons:

Electron configuration: $1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^2 3p^3$

Orbital diagram: two individual squares labeled $1s$ and $2s$ (each with paired arrows), followed by three connected squares labeled $2p$ (each with paired arrows), a single square labeled $3s$ (with paired arrows), and three connected squares labeled $3p$, each containing a single upward pointing arrow.

The last electron added is a $3p$ electron. Therefore, $n = 3$ and, for a $p$-type orbital, $l = 1$. The $m_l$ value could be $-1$, $0$, or $+1$. The three $p$ orbitals are degenerate, so any of these $m_l$ values is correct. For unpaired electrons, convention assigns the value of $+\frac{1}{2}$ for the spin quantum number; thus, $m_s = +\frac{1}{2}$.

# Check Your Learning

Identify the atoms from the electron configurations given:

(a) [Ar]$4s^2 3d^5$

(b) [Kr]$5s^2 4d^{10} 5p^6$

**Answer:**

(a) Mn

(b) Xe

The periodic table can be a powerful tool in predicting the electron configuration of an element. However, we do find exceptions to the order of filling of orbitals. For instance, the electron configurations of the transition metals chromium (Cr; atomic number 24) and copper (Cu; atomic number 29), among others, are not those we would expect. In general, such exceptions involve subshells with very similar energy, and small effects can lead to changes in the order of filling.

In the case of Cr and Cu, we find that half-filled and completely filled subshells apparently represent conditions of preferred stability. This stability is such that an electron shifts from the $4s$ into the $3d$ orbital to gain the extra stability of a half-filled $3d$ subshell (in Cr) or a filled $3d$ subshell (in Cu). Other exceptions also occur. For example, niobium (Nb, atomic number 41) is predicted to have the electron configuration [Kr]$5s^2 4d^3$. Experimentally, we observe that its ground-state electron configuration is actually [Kr]$5s^1 4d^4$. We can rationalize this observation by saying that the electron–electron repulsions experienced by pairing the electrons in the $5s$ orbital are larger than the gap in energy between the $5s$ and $4d$ orbitals. There is no simple method to predict the exceptions for atoms where the magnitude of the repulsions between electrons is greater than the small differences in energy between subshells.

# Electron Configurations and the Periodic Table

As described earlier, the periodic table arranges atoms based on increasing atomic number so that elements with the same chemical properties recur periodically. When their electron configurations are added to the table, we also see a periodic recurrence of similar electron configurations in the outer shells of these elements. Because they are in the outer shells of an atom, valence electrons play the most important role in chemical reactions. The outer electrons have the highest energy of the electrons in an atom and are more easily lost or shared than the core electrons. Valence electrons are also the determining factor in some physical properties of the elements.

Elements in any one group (or column) have the same number of valence electrons; the alkali metals lithium and sodium each have only one valence electron, the alkaline earth metals beryllium and magnesium each have two, and the halogens fluorine and chlorine each have seven valence electrons. The similarity in chemical properties among elements of the same group occurs because they have the same number of valence electrons. It is the loss, gain, or sharing of valence electrons that defines how elements react.

It is important to remember that the periodic table was developed on the basis of the chemical behavior of the elements, well before any idea of their atomic structure was available. Now we can understand why the periodic table has the arrangement it has—the arrangement puts elements whose atoms have the same number of valence electrons in the same group. The colored sections of the periodic table show the three categories of elements classified by the orbitals being filled: main group, transition, and inner transition elements. These classifications determine which orbitals are counted in the valence shell, or highest energy level orbitals of an atom.

- **Main group elements** (sometimes called representative elements) are those in which the last electron added enters an $s$ or a $p$ orbital in the outermost shell. This category includes all the nonmetallic elements, as well as many metals and the metalloids. The valence electrons for main group elements are those with the highest $n$ level. For example, gallium (Ga, atomic number 31) has the electron configuration [Ar]$4s^2 3d^{10} 4p^1$, which contains three valence electrons. The completely filled $d$ orbitals count as core, not valence, electrons.

- **Transition elements or transition metals** are metallic elements in which the last electron added enters a $d$ orbital. The valence electrons (those added after the last noble gas configuration) in these elements include the $ns$ and $(n - 1)d$ electrons. The official IUPAC definition of transition elements specifies those with partially filled $d$ orbitals. Thus, the elements with completely filled orbitals (Zn, Cd, Hg, as well as Cu, Ag, and Au) are not technically transition elements. However, the term is frequently used to refer to the entire $d$ block, and this usage is adopted here.

- **Inner transition elements** are metallic elements in which the last electron added occupies an $f$ orbital. They are shown in green in the periodic table. The valence shells of the inner transition elements consist of the $(n - 2)f$, the $(n - 1)d$, and the $ns$ subshells. There are two inner transition series:
  - The lanthanide series: lanthanum (La) through lutetium (Lu)
  - The actinide series: actinium (Ac) through lawrencium (Lr)

Lanthanum and actinium, because of their similarities to the other members of the series, are included and used to name the series, even though they are transition metals with no $f$ electrons.

# Electron Configurations of Ions

Ions are formed when atoms gain or lose electrons. A **cation** (positively charged ion) forms when one or more electrons are removed from a parent atom. For main group elements, the electrons that were added last are the first electrons removed. For transition metals and inner transition metals, however, electrons in the $s$ orbital are easier to remove than the $d$ or $f$ electrons, and so the highest $ns$ electrons are lost, and then the $(n - 1)d$ or $(n - 2)f$ electrons are removed. An **anion** (negatively charged ion) forms when one or more electrons are added to a parent atom. The added electrons fill in the order predicted by the Aufbau principle.

# Example 3.11: Predicting Electron Configurations of Ions

**What is the electron configuration of:**

(a) Na$^+$

(b) P$^{3-}$

(c) Al$^{2+}$

(d) Fe$^{2+}$

(e) Sm$^{3+}$

**Solution**

First, write out the electron configuration for each parent atom. We have chosen to show the full, unabbreviated configurations to provide more practice for students who want it, but listing the core-abbreviated electron configurations is also acceptable. Next, determine whether an electron is gained or lost. Remember electrons are negatively charged, so ions with a positive charge have lost an electron. For main group elements, the last orbital gains or loses the electron. For transition metals, the last $s$ orbital loses an electron before the $d$ orbitals.

(a) Na: $1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^1$. Sodium cation loses one electron, so

\[
\text{Na}^+: 1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^1 \to 1s^2 2s^2 2p^6
\]

(b) P: $1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^2 3p^3$. Phosphorus trianion gains three electrons, so

\[
\text{P}^{3-}: 1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^2 3p^3 \to 1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^2 3p^6
\]

(c) Al: $1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^2 3p^1$. Aluminum dication loses two electrons, so

\[
\text{Al}^{2+}: 1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^2 3p^1 \to 1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^1
\]

(d) Fe: $1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^2 3p^6 4s^2 3d^6$. Iron(II) loses two electrons and, since it is a transition metal, they are removed from the $4s$ orbital:

\[
\text{Fe}^{2+}: 1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^2 3p^6 4s^2 3d^6 \to 1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^2 3p^6 3d^6
\]

(e) Sm: $1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^2 3p^6 4s^2 3d^{10} 4p^6 5s^2 4d^{10} 5p^6 6s^2 4f^6$. Samarium trication loses three electrons. The first two will be lost from the $6s$ orbital, and the final one is removed from the $4f$ orbital:

\[
\text{Sm}^{3+}: 1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^2 3p^6 4s^2 3d^{10} 4p^6 5s^2 4d^{10} 5p^6 6s^2 4f^6 \to 1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^2 3p^6 4s^2 3d^{10} 4p^6 5s^2 4d^{10} 5p^6 4f^5
\]

# Check Your Learning

Which ion with a +2 charge has the electron configuration $1s^2 2s^2 2p^6 3s^2 3p^6 4s^2 3d^{10} 4p^6 4d^5$? Which ion with a +3 charge has this configuration?

**Answer:**

Tc$^{2+}$, Ru$^{3+}$