# Catalysis

A catalyst can speed up the rate of a reaction. Though this increase in reaction rate may cause a system to reach equilibrium more quickly (by speeding up the forward and reverse reactions), a catalyst has no effect on the value of an equilibrium constant nor on equilibrium concentrations.

The interplay of changes in concentration or pressure, temperature, and the lack of an influence of a catalyst on a chemical equilibrium is illustrated in the industrial synthesis of ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen according to the equation

\[
\mathrm{N_2(g) + 3H_2(g) \rightleftharpoons 2NH_3(g)}
\]

A large quantity of ammonia is manufactured by this reaction. Each year, ammonia is among the top 10 chemicals, by mass, manufactured in the world. About 2 billion pounds are manufactured in the United States each year.

Ammonia plays a vital role in our global economy. It is used in the production of fertilizers and is, itself, an important fertilizer for the growth of corn, cotton, and other crops. Large quantities of ammonia are converted to nitric acid, which plays an important role in the production of fertilizers, explosives, plastics, dyes, and fibers, and is also used in the steel industry.

It has long been known that nitrogen and hydrogen react to form ammonia. However, it became possible to manufacture ammonia in useful quantities by the reaction of nitrogen and hydrogen only in the early 20th century after the factors that influence its equilibrium were understood.

To be practical, an industrial process must give a large yield of product relatively quickly. One way to increase the yield of ammonia is to increase the pressure on the system in which N₂, H₂, and NH₃ are at equilibrium or are coming to equilibrium.

\[
\mathrm{N_2(g) + 3H_2(g) \rightleftharpoons 2NH_3(g)}
\]

The formation of additional amounts of ammonia reduces the total pressure exerted by the system and somewhat reduces the stress of the increased pressure.

Although increasing the pressure of a mixture of N₂, H₂, and NH₃ will increase the yield of ammonia, at low temperatures, the rate of formation of ammonia is slow. At room temperature, for example, the reaction is so slow that if we prepared a mixture of N₂ and H₂, no detectable amount of ammonia would form during our lifetime. The formation of ammonia from hydrogen and nitrogen is an exothermic process:

\[
\mathrm{N_2(g) + 3H_2(g) \rightarrow 2NH_3(g)} \quad \Delta H = -92.2 \text{ kJ}
\]

Thus, increasing the temperature to increase the rate lowers the yield. If we lower the temperature to shift the equilibrium to favor the formation of more ammonia, equilibrium is reached more slowly because of the large decrease of reaction rate with decreasing temperature.

Part of the rate of formation lost by operating at lower temperatures can be recovered by using a catalyst. The net effect of the catalyst on the reaction is to cause equilibrium to be reached more rapidly.

In the commercial production of ammonia, conditions of about 500 °C, 150–900 atm, and the presence of a catalyst are used to give the best compromise among rate, yield, and the cost of the equipment necessary to produce and contain high-pressure gases at high temperatures.

Among the factors affecting chemical reaction rates discussed earlier in this chapter was the presence of a catalyst, a substance that can increase the reaction rate without being consumed in the reaction. The concepts introduced in the previous section on reaction mechanisms provide the basis for understanding how catalysts are able to accomplish this very important function.

Reaction diagrams for a chemical process in the absence and presence of a catalyst reveal several traits of these reactions. Consistent with the fact that the two diagrams represent the same overall reaction, both curves begin and end at the same energies (in this case, because products are more energetic than reactants, the reaction is endothermic). The reaction mechanisms, however, are clearly different. The uncatalyzed reaction proceeds via a one-step mechanism (one transition state observed), whereas the catalyzed reaction follows a two-step mechanism (two transition states observed) with a notably lesser activation energy. This difference illustrates the means by which a catalyst functions to accelerate reactions, namely, by providing an alternative reaction mechanism with a lower activation energy. Although the catalyzed reaction mechanism for a reaction needn’t necessarily involve a different number of steps than the uncatalyzed mechanism, it must provide a reaction path whose rate determining step is faster (lower $E_a$).

### Example 17.15 Reaction Diagrams for Catalyzed Reactions

The two reaction diagrams here represent the same reaction: one without a catalyst and one with a catalyst. Estimate the activation energy for each process, and identify which one involves a catalyst.

Activation energies are calculated by subtracting the reactant energy from the transition state energy.

\[
\text{diagram (a)}: E_a = 32 \text{ kJ} - 6 \text{ kJ} = 26 \text{ kJ}
\]

\[
\text{diagram (b)}: E_a = 20 \text{ kJ} - 6 \text{ kJ} = 14 \text{ kJ}
\]

The catalyzed reaction is the one with lesser activation energy, in this case represented by diagram (b).

**Check Your Learning**

Reaction diagrams for a chemical process with and without a catalyst are shown below. Both reactions involve a two-step mechanism with a rate-determining first step. Compute activation energies for the first step of each mechanism, and identify which corresponds to the catalyzed reaction. How do the second steps of these two mechanisms compare?

Answer:

For the first step, $E_a = 80$ kJ for (a) and 70 kJ for (b), so diagram (b) depicts the catalyzed reaction. Activation energies for the second steps of both mechanisms are the same, 20 kJ.

## Homogeneous Catalysts

A homogeneous catalyst is present in the same phase as the reactants. It interacts with a reactant to form an intermediate substance, which then decomposes or reacts with another reactant in one or more steps to regenerate the original catalyst and form product.

As an important illustration of homogeneous catalysis, consider the earth’s ozone layer. Ozone in the upper atmosphere, which protects the earth from ultraviolet radiation, is formed when oxygen molecules absorb ultraviolet light and undergo the reaction:

\[
3 \mathrm{O_2(g)} \xrightleftharpoons[h\nu]{} 2 \mathrm{O_3(g)}
\]

Ozone is a relatively unstable molecule that decomposes to yield diatomic oxygen by the reverse of this equation. This decomposition reaction is consistent with the following two-step mechanism:

\[
\mathrm{O_3 \rightarrow O_2 + O}
\]

\[
\mathrm{O + O_3 \rightarrow 2 O_2}
\]

A number of substances can catalyze the decomposition of ozone. For example, the nitric oxide-catalyzed decomposition of ozone is believed to occur via the following three-step mechanism:

\[
\mathrm{NO(g) + O_3(g) \rightarrow NO_2(g) + O_2(g)}
\]

\[
\mathrm{O_3(g) \rightarrow O_2(g) + O(g)}
\]

\[
\mathrm{NO_2(g) + O(g) \rightarrow NO(g) + O_2(g)}
\]

As required, the overall reaction is the same for both the two-step uncatalyzed mechanism and the three-step NO-catalyzed mechanism:

\[
2 \mathrm{O_3(g)} \rightarrow 3 \mathrm{O_2(g)}
\]

Notice that NO is a reactant in the first step of the mechanism and a product in the last step. This is another characteristic trait of a catalyst: Though it participates in the chemical reaction, it is not consumed by the reaction.

## Heterogeneous Catalysts

A heterogeneous catalyst is a catalyst that is present in a different phase (usually a solid) than the reactants. Such catalysts generally function by furnishing an active surface upon which a reaction can occur. Gas and liquid phase reactions catalyzed by heterogeneous catalysts occur on the surface of the catalyst rather than within the gas or liquid phase.

Heterogeneous catalysis typically involves the following processes:

- Adsorption of the reactant(s) onto the surface of the catalyst  
- Activation of the adsorbed reactant(s)  
- Reaction of the adsorbed reactant(s)  
- Desorption of product(s) from the surface of the catalyst  

Many important chemical products are prepared via industrial processes that use heterogeneous catalysts, including ammonia, nitric acid, sulfuric acid, and methanol. Heterogeneous catalysts are also used in the catalytic converters found on most gasoline-powered automobiles.

# The connection between the rate of a reaction and its equilibrium constant

The connection between the rate of a reaction and its equilibrium constant is one we can easily determine with just a bit of algebraic substitution. For a reaction where substance A forms B (and the reverse)

\[
A \rightleftharpoons B
\]

The rate of the forward reaction is

\[
\text{Rate}_f = k_f [A]
\]

And the rate of the reverse reaction is

\[
\text{Rate}_r = k_r [B]
\]

Once equilibrium is established, the rates of the forward and reverse reactions are equal:

\[
\text{Rate}_f = \text{Rate}_r \implies k_f [A] = k_r [B]
\]

Rearranging a bit, we get

\[
k_f [A] = k_r [B]
\]

Also recall that the equilibrium constant is simply the ratio of product to reactant concentration at equilibrium:

\[
K = \frac{[B]}{[A]}
\]

So the equilibrium constant turns out to be the ratio of the forward to the reverse rate constants. This relationship also helps cement our understanding of the nature of a catalyst. That is, a catalyst does not change the fundamental equilibrium (or the underlying thermodynamics) of a reaction. Rather, what it does is alter the rate constant for the reaction – that is, both rate constants, forward and reverse, equally. In doing so, catalysts usually speed up the rate at which reactions attain equilibrium (though they can be used to slow down the rate of reaction as well!).