# Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases

## Acid and Base Ionization Constants

The relative strength of an acid or base is the extent to which it ionizes when dissolved in water. If the ionization reaction is essentially complete, the acid or base is termed strong; if relatively little ionization occurs, the acid or base is weak. As will be evident throughout the remainder of this chapter, there are many more weak acids and bases than strong ones.

The relative strengths of acids may be quantified by measuring their equilibrium constants in aqueous solutions. In solutions of the same concentration, stronger acids ionize to a greater extent, and so yield higher concentrations of hydronium ions than do weaker acids. The equilibrium constant for an acid is called the acid-ionization constant, $K_a$. For the reaction of an acid HA:

\[
\mathrm{HA}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_3O}^+(aq) + \mathrm{A}^-(aq),
\]

the acid ionization constant is written

\[
K_a = \frac{[\mathrm{H_3O}^+][\mathrm{A}^-]}{[\mathrm{HA}]}
\]

where the concentrations are those at equilibrium. Although water is a reactant in the reaction, it is the solvent as well, so we do not include $[\mathrm{H_2O}]$ in the equation. The larger the $K_a$ of an acid, the larger the concentration of $\mathrm{H_3O}^+$ and $\mathrm{A}^-$ relative to the concentration of the nonionized acid, HA, in an equilibrium mixture, and the stronger the acid. An acid is classified as “strong” when it undergoes complete ionization, in which case the concentration of HA is zero and the acid ionization constant is immeasurably large ($K_a \approx \infty$). Acids that are partially ionized are called “weak,” and their acid ionization constants may be experimentally measured. A table of ionization constants for weak acids is provided in Appendix H.

To illustrate this idea, three acid ionization equations and $K_a$ values are shown below. The ionization constants increase from first to last of the listed equations, indicating the relative acid strength increases in the order $\mathrm{CH_3CO_2H} < \mathrm{HNO_2} < \mathrm{HSO_4}^-$:

\[
\mathrm{CH_3CO_2H}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_3O}^+(aq) + \mathrm{CH_3CO_2}^-(aq) \quad K_a = 1.8 \times 10^{-5}
\]

\[
\mathrm{HNO_2}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_3O}^+(aq) + \mathrm{NO_2}^-(aq) \quad K_a = 4.6 \times 10^{-4}
\]

\[
\mathrm{HSO_4}^-(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(aq) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_3O}^+(aq) + \mathrm{SO_4}^{2-}(aq) \quad K_a = 1.2 \times 10^{-2}
\]

Another measure of the strength of an acid is its percent ionization. The percent ionization of a weak acid is defined in terms of the composition of an equilibrium mixture:

\[
\% \text{ionization} = \frac{[\mathrm{H_3O}^+]_{eq}}{[\mathrm{HA}]_0} \times 100
\]

where the numerator is equivalent to the concentration of the acid's conjugate base (per stoichiometry, $[\mathrm{A}^-] = [\mathrm{H_3O}^+]$). Unlike the $K_a$ value, the percent ionization of a weak acid varies with the initial concentration of acid, typically decreasing as concentration increases. Equilibrium calculations of the sort described later in this chapter can be used to confirm this behavior.

### Example 14.7 Calculation of Percent Ionization from pH

Calculate the percent ionization of a 0.125-M solution of nitrous acid (a weak acid), with a pH of 2.09.

**Solution**

The percent ionization for an acid is:

\[
\frac{[\mathrm{H_3O}^+]_{eq}}{[\mathrm{HNO_2}]_0} \times 100
\]

Converting the provided pH to hydronium ion molarity yields

\[
[\mathrm{H_3O}^+] = 10^{-2.09} = 0.0081\, M
\]

Substituting this value and the provided initial acid concentration into the percent ionization equation gives

\[
\frac{8.1 \times 10^{-3}}{0.125} \times 100 = 6.5\%
\]

(Recall the provided pH value of 2.09 is logarithmic, and so it contains just two significant digits, limiting the certainty of the computed percent ionization.)

**Check Your Learning**

Calculate the percent ionization of a 0.10-M solution of acetic acid with a pH of 2.89.

**Answer:** 1.3% ionized

Just as for acids, the relative strength of a base is reflected in the magnitude of its base-ionization constant ($K_b$) in aqueous solutions. In solutions of the same concentration, stronger bases ionize to a greater extent, and so yield higher hydroxide ion concentrations than do weaker bases. A stronger base has a larger ionization constant than does a weaker base. For the reaction of a base, B:

\[
\mathrm{B}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{HB}^+(aq) + \mathrm{OH}^-(aq),
\]

the ionization constant is written as

\[
K_b = \frac{[\mathrm{HB}^+][\mathrm{OH}^-]}{[\mathrm{B}]}
\]

Inspection of the data for three weak bases presented below shows the base strength increases in the order $\mathrm{NO_2}^- < \mathrm{CH_2CO_2}^- < \mathrm{NH_3}$.

\[
\mathrm{NO_2}^-(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{HNO_2}(aq) + \mathrm{OH}^-(aq) \quad K_b = 2.17 \times 10^{-11}
\]

\[
\mathrm{CH_3CO_2}^-(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{CH_3CO_2H}(aq) + \mathrm{OH}^-(aq) \quad K_b = 5.6 \times 10^{-10}
\]

\[
\mathrm{NH_3}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{NH_4}^+(aq) + \mathrm{OH}^-(aq) \quad K_b = 1.8 \times 10^{-5}
\]

A table of ionization constants for weak bases appears in Appendix I. As for acids, the relative strength of a base is also reflected in its percent ionization, computed as

\[
\% \text{ionization} = \frac{[\mathrm{OH}^-]_{eq}}{[\mathrm{B}]_0} \times 100\%
\]

but will vary depending on the base ionization constant and the initial concentration of the solution.

## Relative Strengths of Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs

Brønsted-Lowry acid-base chemistry is the transfer of protons; thus, logic suggests a relation between the relative strengths of conjugate acid-base pairs. The strength of an acid or base is quantified in its ionization constant, $K_a$ or $K_b$, which represents the extent of the acid or base ionization reaction. For the conjugate acid-base pair HA / A$^-$, ionization equilibrium equations and ionization constant expressions are

\[
\mathrm{HA}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_3O}^+(aq) + \mathrm{A}^-(aq) \quad K_a = \frac{[\mathrm{H_3O}^+][\mathrm{A}^-]}{[\mathrm{HA}]}
\]

\[
\mathrm{A}^-(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{OH}^-(aq) + \mathrm{HA}(aq) \quad K_b = \frac{[\mathrm{HA}][\mathrm{OH}^-]}{[\mathrm{A}^-]}
\]

Adding these two chemical equations yields the equation for the autoionization of water:

\[
2 \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_3O}^+(aq) + \mathrm{OH}^-(aq)
\]

As discussed in another chapter on equilibrium, the equilibrium constant for a summed reaction is equal to the mathematical product of the equilibrium constants for the added reactions, and so

\[
K_a \times K_b = \frac{[\mathrm{H_3O}^+][\mathrm{A}^-]}{[\mathrm{HA}]} \times \frac{[\mathrm{HA}][\mathrm{OH}^-]}{[\mathrm{A}^-]} = [\mathrm{H_3O}^+][\mathrm{OH}^-] = K_w
\]

This equation states the relation between ionization constants for any conjugate acid-base pair, namely, their mathematical product is equal to the ion product of water, $K_w$. By rearranging this equation, a reciprocal relation between the strengths of a conjugate acid-base pair becomes evident:

\[
K_a = \frac{K_w}{K_b} \quad \text{or} \quad K_b = \frac{K_w}{K_a}
\]

The inverse proportional relation between $K_a$ and $K_b$ means the stronger the acid or base, the weaker its conjugate partner.

### Example 14.8 Calculating Ionization Constants for Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs

Use the $K_b$ for the nitrite ion, $\mathrm{NO_2}^-$, to calculate the $K_a$ for its conjugate acid.

**Solution**

$K_b$ for $\mathrm{NO_2}^-$ is given as $2.17 \times 10^{-11}$. The conjugate acid of $\mathrm{NO_2}^-$ is $\mathrm{HNO_2}$; $K_a$ for $\mathrm{HNO_2}$ can be calculated using the relationship:

\[
K_a \times K_b = 1.0 \times 10^{-14} = K_w
\]

Solving for $K_a$ yields

\[
K_a = \frac{K_w}{K_b} = \frac{1.0 \times 10^{-14}}{2.17 \times 10^{-11}} = 4.6 \times 10^{-4}
\]

This answer can be verified by finding the $K_a$ for $\mathrm{HNO_2}$ in Appendix H.

**Check Your Learning**

Determine the relative acid strengths of $\mathrm{NH_4}^+$ and HCN by comparing their ionization constants. The ionization constant of HCN is given in Appendix H as $4.9 \times 10^{-10}$. The ionization constant of $\mathrm{NH_4}^+$ is not listed, but the ionization constant of its conjugate base, $\mathrm{NH_3}$, is listed as $1.8 \times 10^{-5}$.

**Answer:** $\mathrm{NH_4}^+$ is the slightly stronger acid ($K_a$ for $\mathrm{NH_4}^+ = 5.6 \times 10^{-10}$).

## Acid-Base Equilibrium Calculations

The chapter on chemical equilibria introduced several types of equilibrium calculations and the various mathematical strategies that are helpful in performing them. These strategies are generally useful for equilibrium systems regardless of chemical reaction class, and so they may be effectively applied to acid-base equilibrium problems. This section presents several example exercises involving equilibrium calculations for acid-base systems.

### Example 14.9 Determination of $K_a$ from Equilibrium Concentrations

Acetic acid is the principal ingredient in vinegar that provides its sour taste. At equilibrium, a solution contains $[\mathrm{CH_3CO_2H}] = 0.0787\, M$ and $[\mathrm{H_3O}^+] = [\mathrm{CH_3CO_2}^-] = 0.00118\, M$. What is the value of $K_a$ for acetic acid?

**Solution**

The relevant equilibrium equation and its equilibrium constant expression are shown below. Substitution of the provided equilibrium concentrations permits a straightforward calculation of the $K_a$ for acetic acid.

\[
\mathrm{CH_3CO_2H}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_3O}^+(aq) + \mathrm{CH_3CO_2}^-(aq)
\]

\[
K_a = \frac{[\mathrm{H_3O}^+][\mathrm{CH_3CO_2}^-]}{[\mathrm{CH_3CO_2H}]} = \frac{(0.00118)(0.00118)}{0.0787} = 1.77 \times 10^{-5}
\]

**Check Your Learning**

The $\mathrm{HSO_4}^-$ ion, a weak acid used in some household cleansers:

\[
\mathrm{HSO_4}^-(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_3O}^+(aq) + \mathrm{SO_4}^{2-}(aq)
\]

What is the acid ionization constant for this weak acid if an equilibrium mixture has the following composition: $[\mathrm{H_3O}^+] = 0.027\, M$; $[\mathrm{HSO_4}^-] = 0.29\, M$; and $[\mathrm{SO_4}^{2-}] = 0.13\, M$?

**Answer:** $K_a$ for $\mathrm{HSO_4}^- = 1.2 \times 10^{-2}$

### Example 14.10 Determination of $K_b$ from Equilibrium Concentrations

Caffeine, $\mathrm{C_8H_{10}N_4O_2}$, is a weak base. What is the value of $K_b$ for caffeine if a solution at equilibrium has $[\mathrm{C_8H_{10}N_4O_2}] = 0.050\, M$, $[\mathrm{C_8H_{10}N_4O_2H}^+] = 5.0 \times 10^{-3}\, M$, and $[\mathrm{OH}^-] = 2.5 \times 10^{-3}\, M$?

**Solution**

The relevant equilibrium equation and its equilibrium constant expression are shown below. Substitution of the provided equilibrium concentrations permits a straightforward calculation of the $K_b$ for caffeine.

\[
\mathrm{C_8H_{10}N_4O_2}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{C_8H_{10}N_4O_2H}^+(aq) + \mathrm{OH}^-(aq)
\]

\[
K_b = \frac{[\mathrm{C_8H_{10}N_4O_2H}^+][\mathrm{OH}^-]}{[\mathrm{C_8H_{10}N_4O_2}]} = \frac{(5.0 \times 10^{-3})(2.5 \times 10^{-3})}{0.050} = 2.5 \times 10^{-4}
\]

**Check Your Learning**

What is the equilibrium constant for the ionization of the $\mathrm{HPO_4}^{2-}$ ion, a weak base

\[
\mathrm{HPO_4}^{2-}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_2PO_4}^-(aq) + \mathrm{OH}^-(aq)
\]

if the composition of an equilibrium mixture is as follows: $[\mathrm{OH}^-] = 1.3 \times 10^{-6}\, M$; $[\mathrm{H_2PO_4}^-] = 0.042\, M$; and $[\mathrm{HPO_4}^{2-}] = 0.341\, M$?

**Answer:** $K_b$ for $\mathrm{HPO_4}^{2-} = 1.6 \times 10^{-7}$

### Example 14.11 Determination of $K_a$ or $K_b$ from pH

The pH of a 0.0516-M solution of nitrous acid, $\mathrm{HNO_2}$, is 2.34. What is its $K_a$?

\[
\mathrm{HNO_2}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_3O}^+(aq) + \mathrm{NO_2}^-(aq)
\]

**Solution**

The nitrous acid concentration provided is a formal concentration, one that does not account for any chemical equilibria that may be established in solution. Such concentrations are treated as “initial” values for equilibrium calculations using the ICE table approach. Notice the initial value of hydronium ion is listed as approximately zero because a small concentration of $\mathrm{H_3O}^+$ is present ($1 \times 10^{-7} M$) due to the autoprotolysis of water. In many cases, such as all the ones presented in this chapter, this concentration is much less than that generated by ionization of the acid (or base) in question and may be neglected.

The pH provided is a logarithmic measure of the hydronium ion concentration resulting from the acid ionization of the nitrous acid, and so it represents an “equilibrium” value for the ICE table:

\[
[\mathrm{H_3O}^+] = 10^{-2.34} = 0.0046\, M
\]

The ICE table for this system is then:

This table has two main columns and four rows. The first row for the first column does not have a heading and then has the following in the first column: Initial concentration ( M ), Change ( M ), Equilibrium concentration ( M ). The second column has the header of “H N O subscript 2 plus sign H subscript 2 O equilibrium sign H subscript 3 O superscript positive sign plus sign N O subscript 2 superscript negative sign.” Under the second column is a subgroup of four columns and three rows. The first column has the following: 0.0516, negative 0.0046, 0.0470. The second column is blank in all three rows. The third column has the following: approximately 0, positive 0.0046, 0.0046. The fourth column has the following: 0, positive 0.0046, 0.0046.

Finally, calculate the value of the equilibrium constant using the data in the table:

\[
K_a = \frac{[\mathrm{H_3O}^+][\mathrm{NO_2}^-]}{[\mathrm{HNO_2}]} = \frac{(0.0046)(0.0046)}{0.0470} = 4.6 \times 10^{-4}
\]

**Check Your Learning**

The pH of a solution of household ammonia, a 0.950-M solution of $\mathrm{NH_3}$, is 11.612. What is $K_b$ for $\mathrm{NH_3}$?

**Answer:** $K_b = 1.8 \times 10^{-5}$

### Example 14.12 Calculating Equilibrium Concentrations in a Weak Acid Solution

Formic acid, $\mathrm{HCO_2H}$, is one irritant that causes the body’s reaction to some ant bites and stings.

What is the concentration of hydronium ion and the pH of a 0.534-M solution of formic acid?

\[
\mathrm{HCO_2H}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_3O}^+(aq) + \mathrm{HCO_2}^-(aq) \quad K_a = 1.8 \times 10^{-4}
\]

**Solution**

The ICE table for this system is:

This table has two main columns and four rows. The first row for the first column does not have a heading and then has the following in the first column: Initial concentration ( M ), Change ( M ), Equilibrium concentration ( M ). The second column has the header of “H C O subscript 2 H plus sign H subscript 2 O equilibrium arrow H subscript 3 O superscript positive sign.” Under the second column is a subgroup of four columns and three rows. The first column has the following: 0.534, blank, 0.534 minus x. The second column is blank in all three rows. The third column has the following: approximately 0, positive x, x. The fourth column has the following: 0, positive x, x.

\[
K_a = \frac{[H_3O^+][HCO_2^-]}{[HCO_2H]} = \frac{x^2}{0.534 - x} = 1.8 \times 10^{-4}
\]

The relatively large initial concentration and small equilibrium constant permits the simplifying assumption that $x$ will be much less than 0.534, and so the equation becomes

\[
K_a = \frac{x^2}{0.534}
\]

Solving the equation for $x$ yields

\[
x^2 = 0.534 \times (1.8 \times 10^{-4}) = 9.6 \times 10^{-5}
\]

\[
x = \sqrt{9.6 \times 10^{-5}} = 9.8 \times 10^{-3} M
\]

To check the assumption that $x$ is small compared to 0.534, its relative magnitude can be estimated:

\[
\frac{x}{0.534} = \frac{9.8 \times 10^{-3}}{0.534} = 1.8 \times 10^{-2} \quad (1.8\% \text{ of } 0.534)
\]

Because $x$ is less than 5% of the initial concentration, the assumption is valid.

As defined in the ICE table, $x$ is equal to the equilibrium concentration of hydronium ion:

\[
x = [\mathrm{H_3O}^+] = 0.0098\, M
\]

Finally, the pH is calculated to be

\[
pH = -\log [\mathrm{H_3O}^+] = -\log(0.0098) = 2.01
\]

**Check Your Learning**

Only a small fraction of a weak acid ionizes in aqueous solution. What is the percent ionization of a 0.100-M solution of acetic acid, $\mathrm{CH_3CO_2H}$?

\[
\mathrm{CH_3CO_2H}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_3O}^+(aq) + \mathrm{CH_3CO_2}^-(aq) \quad K_a = 1.8 \times 10^{-5}
\]

**Answer:** percent ionization = 1.3%

### Example 14.13 Calculating Equilibrium Concentrations in a Weak Base Solution

Find the concentration of hydroxide ion, the pOH, and the pH of a 0.25-M solution of trimethylamine, a weak base:

\[
(\mathrm{CH_3})_3\mathrm{N}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons (\mathrm{CH_3})_3\mathrm{NH}^+(aq) + \mathrm{OH}^-(aq) \quad K_b = 6.3 \times 10^{-5}
\]

**Solution**

The ICE table for this system is:

This table has two main columns and four rows. The first row for the first column does not have a heading and then has the following in the first column: Initial concentration ( M ), Change ( M ), Equilibrium concentration ( M ). The second column has the header of “( C H subscript 3 ) subscript 3 N plus sign H subscript 2 O equilibrium arrow ( C H subscript 3 ) subscript 3 N H superscript positive sign plus sign O H superscript positive sign.” Under the second column is a subgroup of four columns and three rows. The first column has the following: 0.25, negative x, 0.25 plus sign negative x. The second column is blank in all three rows. The third column has the following: 0, x, 0 plus x. The fourth column has the following: approximately 0, x, and approximately 0 plus x.

\[
K_b = \frac{[(\mathrm{CH_3})_3\mathrm{NH}^+][\mathrm{OH}^-]}{[(\mathrm{CH_3})_3\mathrm{N}]} = \frac{x^2}{0.25 - x} = 6.3 \times 10^{-5}
\]

Assuming $x \ll 0.25$ and solving for $x$ yields

\[
x = 4.0 \times 10^{-3} M
\]

This value is less than 5% of the initial concentration (0.25), so the assumption is justified.

As defined in the ICE table, $x$ is equal to the equilibrium concentration of hydroxide ion:

\[
[\mathrm{OH}^-] = x = 4.0 \times 10^{-3} M
\]

The pOH is calculated to be

\[
pOH = -\log(4.0 \times 10^{-3}) = 2.40
\]

Using the relation introduced in the previous section of this chapter:

\[
pH + pOH = pK_w = 14.00
\]

permits the computation of pH:

\[
pH = 14.00 - pOH = 14.00 - 2.40 = 11.60
\]

**Check Your Learning**

Calculate the hydroxide ion concentration and the percent ionization of a 0.0325-M solution of ammonia, a weak base with a $K_b$ of $1.76 \times 10^{-5}$.

**Answer:** $7.56 \times 10^{-4} M$, 2.33%

In some cases, the strength of the weak acid or base and its formal (initial) concentration result in an appreciable ionization. Though the ICE strategy remains effective for these systems, the algebra is a bit more involved because the simplifying assumption that $x$ is negligible cannot be made. Calculations of this sort are demonstrated in Example 14.14 below.

### Example 14.14 Calculating Equilibrium Concentrations without Simplifying Assumptions

Sodium bisulfate, NaHSO$_4$, is used in some household cleansers as a source of the $\mathrm{HSO_4}^-$ ion, a weak acid. What is the pH of a 0.50-M solution of $\mathrm{HSO_4}^-$?

\[
\mathrm{HSO_4}^-(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_3O}^+(aq) + \mathrm{SO_4}^{2-}(aq) \quad K_a = 1.2 \times 10^{-2}
\]

**Solution**

The ICE table for this system is:

This table has two main columns and four rows. The first row for the first column does not have a heading and then has the following in the first column: Initial concentration ( M ), Change ( M ), Equilibrium ( M ). The second column has the header of “H S O subscript 4 superscript negative sign plus sign H subscript 2 O equilibrium sign H subscript 3 O superscript positive sign plus sign S O subscript 4 superscript 2 superscript negative sign.” Under the second column is a subgroup of four columns and three rows. The first column has the following: 0.50, negative x, 0.50 minus x. The second column is blank for all three rows. The third column has the following: approximately 0, positive x, x. The fourth column has the following: 0, positive x, x.

Substituting the equilibrium concentration terms into the $K_a$ expression gives

\[
K_a = 1.2 \times 10^{-2} = \frac{x^2}{0.50 - x}
\]

If the assumption that $x \ll 0.5$ is made, simplifying and solving the above equation yields

\[
x = 0.077\, M
\]

This value of $x$ is clearly not significantly less than 0.50 M; rather, it is approximately 15% of the initial concentration:

\[
\frac{x}{[\mathrm{HSO_4}^-]_i} = \frac{0.077}{0.50} = 0.15 \quad (15\%)
\]

Because the simplifying assumption is not valid for this system, the equilibrium constant expression is solved as follows:

\[
K_a = \frac{x^2}{0.50 - x} = 1.2 \times 10^{-2}
\]

Rearranging this equation yields

\[
6.0 \times 10^{-3} - 1.2 \times 10^{-2} x = x^2
\]

Writing the equation in quadratic form gives

\[
x^2 + 1.2 \times 10^{-2} x - 6.0 \times 10^{-3} = 0
\]

Solving for the two roots of this quadratic equation results in a negative value that may be discarded as physically irrelevant and a positive value equal to $x$. As defined in the ICE table, $x$ is equal to the hydronium concentration.

\[
x = [\mathrm{H_3O}^+] = 0.072\, M
\]

\[
pH = -\log [\mathrm{H_3O}^+] = -\log(0.072) = 1.14
\]

**Check Your Learning**

Calculate the pH in a 0.010-M solution of caffeine, a weak base:

\[
\mathrm{C_8H_{10}N_4O_2}(aq) + \mathrm{H_2O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{C_8H_{10}N_4O_2H}^+(aq) + \mathrm{OH}^-(aq) \quad K_b = 2.5 \times 10^{-4}
\]

**Answer:** pH 11.16

## Effect of Molecular Structure on Acid-Base Strength

### Binary Acids and Bases

In the absence of any leveling effect, the acid strength of binary compounds of hydrogen with nonmetals (A) increases as the H–A bond strength decreases down a group in the periodic table. For group 17, the order of increasing acidity is $\mathrm{HF} < \mathrm{HCl} < \mathrm{HBr} < \mathrm{HI}$. Likewise, for group 16, the order of increasing acid strength is $\mathrm{H_2O} < \mathrm{H_2S} < \mathrm{H_2Se} < \mathrm{H_2Te}$.

Across a row in the periodic table, the acid strength of binary hydrogen compounds increases with increasing electronegativity of the nonmetal atom because the polarity of the H–A bond increases. Thus, the order of increasing acidity (for removal of one proton) across the second row is $\mathrm{CH_4} < \mathrm{NH_3} < \mathrm{H_2O} < \mathrm{HF}$; across the third row, it is $\mathrm{SiH_4} < \mathrm{PH_3} < \mathrm{H_2S} < \mathrm{HCl}$.

### Ternary Acids and Bases

Ternary compounds composed of hydrogen, oxygen, and some third element (“E”) may be structured as depicted below. In these compounds, the central E atom is bonded to one or more O atoms, and at least one of the O atoms is also bonded to an H atom, corresponding to the general molecular formula $\mathrm{O}_m\mathrm{E}(\mathrm{OH})_n$. These compounds may be acidic, basic, or amphoteric depending on the properties of the central E atom. Examples of such compounds include sulfuric acid, $\mathrm{O_2S(OH)_2}$, sulfurous acid, $\mathrm{OS(OH)_2}$, nitric acid, $\mathrm{O_2NOH}$, perchloric acid, $\mathrm{O_3ClOH}$, aluminum hydroxide, $\mathrm{Al(OH)_3}$, calcium hydroxide, $\mathrm{Ca(OH)_2}$, and potassium hydroxide, $\mathrm{KOH}$.

If the central atom, E, has a low electronegativity, its attraction for electrons is low. Little tendency exists for the central atom to form a strong covalent bond with the oxygen atom, and bond a between the element and oxygen is more readily broken than bond b between oxygen and hydrogen. Hence bond a is ionic, hydroxide ions are released to the solution, and the material behaves as a base—this is the case with $\mathrm{Ca(OH)_2}$ and $\mathrm{KOH}$. Lower electronegativity is characteristic of the more metallic elements; hence, the metallic elements form ionic hydroxides that are by definition basic compounds.

If, on the other hand, the atom E has a relatively high electronegativity, it strongly attracts the electrons it shares with the oxygen atom, making bond a relatively strongly covalent. The oxygen-hydrogen bond, bond b, is thereby weakened because electrons are displaced toward E. Bond b is polar and readily releases hydrogen ions to the solution, so the material behaves as an acid. High electronegativities are characteristic of the more nonmetallic elements. Thus, nonmetallic elements form covalent compounds containing acidic −OH groups that are called oxyacids.

Increasing the oxidation number of the central atom E also increases the acidity of an oxyacid because this increases the attraction of E for the electrons it shares with oxygen and thereby weakens the O–H bond. Sulfuric acid, $\mathrm{H_2SO_4}$, or $\mathrm{O_2S(OH)_2}$ (with a sulfur oxidation number of +6), is more acidic than sulfurous acid, $\mathrm{H_2SO_3}$, or $\mathrm{OS(OH)_2}$ (with a sulfur oxidation number of +4). Likewise nitric acid, $\mathrm{HNO_3}$, or $\mathrm{O_2NOH}$ (N oxidation number = +5), is more acidic than nitrous acid, $\mathrm{HNO_2}$, or $\mathrm{ONOH}$ (N oxidation number = +3). In each of these pairs, the oxidation number of the central atom is larger for the stronger acid.

Hydroxy compounds of elements with intermediate electronegativities and relatively high oxidation numbers (for example, elements near the diagonal line separating the metals from the nonmetals in the periodic table) are usually amphoteric. This means that the hydroxy compounds act as acids when they react with strong bases and as bases when they react with strong acids. The amphoterism of aluminum hydroxide, which commonly exists as the hydrate $\mathrm{Al(H_2O)_3(OH)_3}$, is reflected in its solubility in both strong acids and strong bases. In strong bases, the relatively insoluble hydrated aluminum hydroxide, $\mathrm{Al(H_2O)_3(OH)_3}$, is converted into the soluble ion, $\mathrm{[Al(H_2O)_2(OH)_4]}^-$, by reaction with hydroxide ion:

\[
\mathrm{Al(H_2O)_3(OH)_3}(aq) + \mathrm{OH}^-(aq) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{H_2O}(l) + \mathrm{[Al(H_2O)_2(OH)_4]}^-(aq)
\]

In this reaction, a proton is transferred from one of the aluminum-bound $\mathrm{H_2O}$ molecules to a hydroxide ion in solution. The $\mathrm{Al(H_2O)_3(OH)_3}$ compound thus acts as an acid under these conditions. On the other hand, when dissolved in strong acids, it is converted to the soluble ion $\mathrm{[Al(H_2O)_6]}^{3+}$ by reaction with hydronium ion:

\[
3 \mathrm{H_3O}^+(aq) + \mathrm{Al(H_2O)_3(OH)_3}(aq) \rightleftharpoons \mathrm{Al(H_2O)_6}^{3+}(aq) + 3 \mathrm{H_2O}(l)
\]

In this case, protons are transferred from hydronium ions in solution to $\mathrm{Al(H_2O)_3(OH)_3}$, and the compound functions as a base.