# Hybridization and Molecular Bonding

Thinking in terms of overlapping atomic orbitals is one way for us to explain how chemical bonds form in diatomic molecules. However, to understand how molecules with more than two atoms form stable bonds, we require a more detailed model. As an example, let us consider the water molecule, in which we have one oxygen atom bonding to two hydrogen atoms. Oxygen has the electron configuration $1s^2 2s^2 2p^4$, with two unpaired electrons (one in each of the two 2p orbitals). Valence bond theory would predict that the two O–H bonds form from the overlap of these two 2p orbitals with the 1s orbitals of the hydrogen atoms. If this were the case, the bond angle would be 90°, because p orbitals are perpendicular to each other. Experimental evidence shows that the bond angle is 104.5°, not 90°. The prediction of the valence bond theory model does not match the real-world observations of a water molecule; a different model is needed.

Quantum-mechanical calculations suggest why the observed bond angles in H$_2$O differ from those predicted by the overlap of the 1s orbital of the hydrogen atoms with the 2p orbitals of the oxygen atom. The mathematical expression known as the wave function, $\psi$, contains information about each orbital and the wavelike properties of electrons in an isolated atom. When atoms are bound together in a molecule, the wave functions combine to produce new mathematical descriptions that have different shapes. This process of combining the wave functions for atomic orbitals is called hybridization and is mathematically accomplished by the linear combination of atomic orbitals, LCAO, (a technique that we will encounter again later). The new orbitals that result are called hybrid orbitals. The valence orbitals in an isolated oxygen atom are a 2s orbital and three 2p orbitals. The valence orbitals in an oxygen atom in a water molecule differ; they consist of four equivalent hybrid orbitals that point approximately toward the corners of a tetrahedron. Consequently, the overlap of the O and H orbitals should result in a tetrahedral bond angle (109.5°). The observed angle of 104.5° is experimental evidence for which quantum-mechanical calculations give a useful explanation: Valence bond theory must include a hybridization component to give accurate predictions.

The following ideas are important in understanding hybridization:

- Hybrid orbitals do not exist in isolated atoms. They are formed only in covalently bonded atoms.
- Hybrid orbitals have shapes and orientations that are very different from those of the atomic orbitals in isolated atoms.
- A set of hybrid orbitals is generated by combining atomic orbitals. The number of hybrid orbitals in a set is equal to the number of atomic orbitals that were combined to produce the set.
- All orbitals in a set of hybrid orbitals are equivalent in shape and energy.
- The type of hybrid orbitals formed in a bonded atom depends on its electron-pair geometry as predicted by the VSEPR theory.
- Hybrid orbitals overlap to form $\sigma$ bonds. Unhybridized orbitals overlap to form $\pi$ bonds.

In the following sections, we shall discuss the common types of hybrid orbitals.

## sp Hybridization

The beryllium atom in a gaseous BeCl$_2$ molecule is an example of a central atom with no lone pairs of electrons in a linear arrangement of three atoms. There are two regions of valence electron density in the BeCl$_2$ molecule that correspond to the two covalent Be–Cl bonds. To accommodate these two electron domains, two of the Be atom’s four valence orbitals will mix to yield two hybrid orbitals. This hybridization process involves mixing of the valence s orbital with one of the valence p orbitals to yield two equivalent sp hybrid orbitals that are oriented in a linear geometry. In this figure, the set of sp orbitals appears similar in shape to the original p orbital, but there is an important difference. The number of atomic orbitals combined always equals the number of hybrid orbitals formed. The p orbital is one orbital that can hold up to two electrons. The sp set is two equivalent orbitals that point 180° from each other. The two electrons that were originally in the s orbital are now distributed to the two sp orbitals, which are half filled. In gaseous BeCl$_2$, these half-filled hybrid orbitals will overlap with orbitals from the chlorine atoms to form two identical $\sigma$ bonds.

We illustrate the electronic differences in an isolated Be atom and in the bonded Be atom in the orbital energy-level diagram. These diagrams represent each orbital by a horizontal line (indicating its energy) and each electron by an arrow. Energy increases toward the top of the diagram. We use one upward arrow to indicate one electron in an orbital and two arrows (up and down) to indicate two electrons of opposite spin.

When atomic orbitals hybridize, the valence electrons occupy the newly created orbitals. The Be atom had two valence electrons, so each of the sp orbitals gets one of these electrons. Each of these electrons pairs up with the unpaired electron on a chlorine atom when a hybrid orbital and a chlorine orbital overlap during the formation of the Be–Cl bonds.

Any central atom surrounded by just two regions of valence electron density in a molecule will exhibit sp hybridization. Other examples include the mercury atom in the linear HgCl$_2$ molecule, the zinc atom in Zn(CH$_3$)$_2$, which contains a linear C–Zn–C arrangement, and the carbon atoms in HCCH and CO$_2$.

## sp$^2$ Hybridization

The valence orbitals of a central atom surrounded by three regions of electron density consist of a set of three sp$^2$ hybrid orbitals and one unhybridized p orbital. This arrangement results from sp$^2$ hybridization, the mixing of one s orbital and two p orbitals to produce three identical hybrid orbitals oriented in a trigonal planar geometry.

Although quantum mechanics yields the “plump” orbital lobes, sometimes for clarity these orbitals are drawn thinner and without the minor lobes to avoid obscuring other features of a given illustration. We will use these “thinner” representations whenever the true view is too crowded to easily visualize.

The observed structure of the borane molecule, BH$_3$, suggests sp$^2$ hybridization for boron in this compound. The molecule is trigonal planar, and the boron atom is involved in three bonds to hydrogen atoms. We can illustrate the comparison of orbitals and electron distribution in an isolated boron atom and in the bonded atom in BH$_3$ as shown in the orbital energy level diagram. We redistribute the three valence electrons of the boron atom in the three sp$^2$ hybrid orbitals, and each boron electron pairs with a hydrogen electron when B–H bonds form.

Any central atom surrounded by three regions of electron density will exhibit sp$^2$ hybridization. This includes molecules with a lone pair on the central atom, such as ClNO, or molecules with two single bonds and a double bond connected to the central atom, as in formaldehyde, CH$_2$O, and ethene, H$_2$CCH$_2$.

## sp$^3$ Hybridization

The valence orbitals of an atom surrounded by a tetrahedral arrangement of bonding pairs and lone pairs consist of a set of four sp$^3$ hybrid orbitals. The hybrids result from the mixing of one s orbital and all three p orbitals that produces four identical sp$^3$ hybrid orbitals. Each of these hybrid orbitals points toward a different corner of a tetrahedron.

A molecule of methane, CH$_4$, consists of a carbon atom surrounded by four hydrogen atoms at the corners of a tetrahedron. The carbon atom in methane exhibits sp$^3$ hybridization. We illustrate the orbitals and electron distribution in an isolated carbon atom and in the bonded atom in CH$_4$. The four valence electrons of the carbon atom are distributed equally in the hybrid orbitals, and each carbon electron pairs with a hydrogen electron when the C–H bonds form.

In a methane molecule, the 1s orbital of each of the four hydrogen atoms overlaps with one of the four sp$^3$ orbitals of the carbon atom to form a sigma ($\sigma$) bond. This results in the formation of four strong, equivalent covalent bonds between the carbon atom and each of the hydrogen atoms to produce the methane molecule, CH$_4$.

The structure of ethane, C$_2$H$_6$, is similar to that of methane in that each carbon in ethane has four neighboring atoms arranged at the corners of a tetrahedron—three hydrogen atoms and one carbon atom. However, in ethane an sp$^3$ orbital of one carbon atom overlaps end to end with an sp$^3$ orbital of a second carbon atom to form a $\sigma$ bond between the two carbon atoms. Each of the remaining sp$^3$ hybrid orbitals overlaps with an s orbital of a hydrogen atom to form carbon–hydrogen $\sigma$ bonds. The orientation of the two CH$_3$ groups is not fixed relative to each other. Experimental evidence shows that rotation around $\sigma$ bonds occurs easily.

An sp$^3$ hybrid orbital can also hold a lone pair of electrons. For example, the nitrogen atom in ammonia is surrounded by three bonding pairs and a lone pair of electrons directed to the four corners of a tetrahedron. The nitrogen atom is sp$^3$ hybridized with one hybrid orbital occupied by the lone pair.

The molecular structure of water is consistent with a tetrahedral arrangement of two lone pairs and two bonding pairs of electrons. Thus we say that the oxygen atom is sp$^3$ hybridized, with two of the hybrid orbitals occupied by lone pairs and two by bonding pairs. Since lone pairs occupy more space than bonding pairs, structures that contain lone pairs have bond angles slightly distorted from the ideal. Perfect tetrahedra have angles of 109.5°, but the observed angles in ammonia (107.3°) and water (104.5°) are slightly smaller. Other examples of sp$^3$ hybridization include CCl$_4$, PCl$_3$, and NCl$_3$.

## sp$^3$d and sp$^3$d$^2$ Hybridization

To describe the five bonding orbitals in a trigonal bipyramidal arrangement, we must use five of the valence shell atomic orbitals (the s orbital, the three p orbitals, and one of the d orbitals), which gives five sp$^3$d hybrid orbitals. With an octahedral arrangement of six hybrid orbitals, we must use six valence shell atomic orbitals (the s orbital, the three p orbitals, and two of the d orbitals in its valence shell), which gives six sp$^3$d$^2$ hybrid orbitals. These hybridizations are only possible for atoms that have d orbitals in their valence subshells (that is, not those in the first or second period).

In a molecule of phosphorus pentachloride, PCl$_5$, there are five P–Cl bonds (thus five pairs of valence electrons around the phosphorus atom) directed toward the corners of a trigonal bipyramid. We use the 3s orbital, the three 3p orbitals, and one of the 3d orbitals to form the set of five sp$^3$d hybrid orbitals that are involved in the P–Cl bonds. Other atoms that exhibit sp$^3$d hybridization include the sulfur atom in SF$_4$ and the chlorine atoms in ClF$_3$ and in ClF$_4^+$.

The sulfur atom in sulfur hexafluoride, SF$_6$, exhibits sp$^3$d$^2$ hybridization. A molecule of sulfur hexafluoride has six bonding pairs of electrons connecting six fluorine atoms to a single sulfur atom. There are no lone pairs of electrons on the central atom. To bond six fluorine atoms, the 3s orbital, the three 3p orbitals, and two of the 3d orbitals form six equivalent sp$^3$d$^2$ hybrid orbitals, each directed toward a different corner of an octahedron. Other atoms that exhibit sp$^3$d$^2$ hybridization include the phosphorus atom in PCl$_6^-$, the iodine atom in the interhalogens IF$_6^+$, IF$_5$, ICl$_4^-$, IF$_4^-$ and the xenon atom in XeF$_4$.

## Assignment of Hybrid Orbitals to Central Atoms

The hybridization of an atom is determined based on the number of regions of electron density that surround it. The geometrical arrangements characteristic of the various sets of hybrid orbitals are consistent with the electron-pair geometries predicted by VSEPR theory. VSEPR theory predicts the shapes of molecules, and hybrid orbital theory provides an explanation for how those shapes are formed. To find the hybridization of a central atom, we can use the following guidelines:

1. Determine the Lewis structure of the molecule.
2. Determine the number of regions of electron density around an atom using VSEPR theory, in which single bonds, multiple bonds, radicals, and lone pairs each count as one region.
3. Assign the set of hybridized orbitals that corresponds to this geometry.

It is important to remember that hybridization was devised to rationalize experimentally observed molecular geometries. The model works well for molecules containing small central atoms, in which the valence electron pairs are close together in space. However, for larger central atoms, the valence-shell electron pairs are farther from the nucleus, and there are fewer repulsions. Their compounds exhibit structures that are often not consistent with VSEPR theory, and hybridized orbitals are not necessary to explain the observed data. For example, we have discussed the H–O–H bond angle in H$_2$O, 104.5°, which is more consistent with sp$^3$ hybrid orbitals (109.5°) on the central atom than with 2p orbitals (90°). Sulfur is in the same group as oxygen, and H$_2$S has a similar Lewis structure. However, it has a much smaller bond angle (92.1°), which indicates much less hybridization on sulfur than oxygen. Continuing down the group, tellurium is even larger than sulfur, and for H$_2$Te, the observed bond angle (90°) is consistent with overlap of the 5p orbitals, without invoking hybridization. We invoke hybridization where it is necessary to explain the observed structures.

## Example 5.3: Assigning Hybridization

Ammonium sulfate is important as a fertilizer. What is the hybridization of the sulfur atom in the sulfate ion, SO$_4^{2-}$?

**Solution**

The Lewis structure of sulfate shows there are four regions of electron density. The hybridization is sp$^3$.

## Check Your Learning

What is the hybridization of the selenium atom in SeF$_4$?

**Answer:** The selenium atom is sp$^3$d hybridized.

## Example 5.4: Assigning Hybridization

Urea, NH$_2$C(O)NH$_2$, is sometimes used as a source of nitrogen in fertilizers. What is the hybridization of the carbon atom in urea?

**Solution**

The carbon atom is surrounded by three regions of electron density, positioned in a trigonal planar arrangement. The hybridization in a trigonal planar electron pair geometry is sp$^2$, which is the hybridization of the carbon atom in urea.

## Check Your Learning

Acetic acid, H$_3$CC(O)OH, is the molecule that gives vinegar its odor and sour taste. What is the hybridization of the two carbon atoms in acetic acid?

**Answer:** H$_3$C, sp$^3$; C(O)OH, sp$^2$.