# Effusion and Diffusion of Gases

If you have ever been in a room when a piping hot pizza was delivered, you have been made aware of the fact that gaseous molecules can quickly spread throughout a room, as evidenced by the pleasant aroma that soon reaches your nose. Although gaseous molecules travel at tremendous speeds (hundreds of meters per second), they collide with other gaseous molecules and travel in many different directions before reaching the desired target. At room temperature, a gaseous molecule will experience billions of collisions per second. The mean free path is the average distance a molecule travels between collisions. The mean free path increases with decreasing pressure; in general, the mean free path for a gaseous molecule will be hundreds of times the diameter of the molecule

In general, we know that when a sample of gas is introduced to one part of a closed container, its molecules very quickly disperse throughout the container; this process by which molecules disperse in space in response to differences in concentration is called diffusion. The gaseous atoms or molecules are, of course, unaware of any concentration gradient, they simply move randomly—regions of higher concentration have more particles than regions of lower concentrations, and so a net movement of species from high to low concentration areas takes place. In a closed environment, diffusion will ultimately result in equal concentrations of gas throughout. The gaseous atoms and molecules continue to move, but since their concentrations are the same in both bulbs, the rates of transfer between the bulbs are equal (no net transfer of molecules occurs).

We are often interested in the rate of diffusion, the amount of gas passing through some area per unit time:

\[
\text{rate of diffusion} = \frac{\text{amount of gas passing through an area}}{\text{unit of time}}
\]

The diffusion rate depends on several factors: temperature; the mass of the atoms or molecules; the concentration gradient (the increase or decrease in concentration from one point to another); the amount of surface area available for diffusion; and the distance the gas particles must travel. Note also that the time required for diffusion to occur is inversely proportional to the rate of diffusion, as shown in the rate of diffusion equation.

A process involving movement of gaseous species similar to diffusion is effusion, the escape of gas molecules through a tiny hole such as a pinhole in a balloon into a vacuum. Although diffusion and effusion rates both depend on the molar mass of the gas involved, their rates are not equal; however, the ratios of their rates are the same.

If a mixture of gases is placed in a container with porous walls, the gases effuse through the small openings in the walls. The lighter gases pass through the small openings more rapidly (at a higher rate) than the heavier ones. In 1832, Thomas Graham studied the rates of effusion of different gases and formulated Graham’s law of effusion: The rate of effusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of its molar mass:

\[
\text{rate of effusion} \propto \frac{1}{\sqrt{\mathcal{M}}}
\]

This means that if two gases A and B are at the same temperature and pressure, the ratio of their effusion rates is inversely proportional to the ratio of the square roots of their molar masses:

\[
\frac{\text{rate of effusion of A}}{\text{rate of effusion of B}} = \frac{\sqrt{\mathcal{M}_B}}{\sqrt{\mathcal{M}_A}}
\]

### Example 8.20  
**Applying Graham’s Law to Rates of Effusion**  
Calculate the ratio of the rate of effusion of hydrogen to the rate of effusion of oxygen.  
**Solution**  
From Graham’s law, we have:

\[
\frac{\text{rate of effusion of hydrogen}}{\text{rate of effusion of oxygen}} = \frac{\sqrt{32\, \text{g/mol}}}{\sqrt{2\, \text{g/mol}}} = \frac{\sqrt{16}}{\sqrt{1}} = \frac{4}{1}
\]

Hydrogen effuses four times as rapidly as oxygen.

**Check Your Learning**  
At a particular pressure and temperature, nitrogen gas effuses at the rate of 79 mL/s. Under the same conditions, at what rate will sulfur dioxide effuse?  
**Answer:** 52 mL/s

### Example 8.21  
**Effusion Time Calculations**  
It takes 243 s for $4.46 \times 10^{-5}$ mol Xe to effuse through a tiny hole. Under the same conditions, how long will it take $4.46 \times 10^{-5}$ mol Ne to effuse?  
**Solution**  
It is important to resist the temptation to use the times directly, and to remember how rate relates to time as well as how it relates to mass. Recall the definition of rate of effusion:

\[
\text{rate of effusion} = \frac{\text{amount of gas transferred}}{\text{time}}
\]

and combine it with Graham’s law:

\[
\frac{\text{rate of effusion of gas Xe}}{\text{rate of effusion of gas Ne}} = \frac{\sqrt{\mathcal{M}_{Ne}}}{\sqrt{\mathcal{M}_{Xe}}}
\]

To get:

\[
\frac{\frac{\text{amount of Xe}}{\text{time for Xe}}}{\frac{\text{amount of Ne}}{\text{time for Ne}}} = \frac{\sqrt{\mathcal{M}_{Ne}}}{\sqrt{\mathcal{M}_{Xe}}}
\]

Noting that amount of A = amount of B, and solving for time for Ne:

\[
\frac{\text{amount of Xe}}{\text{time for Xe}} \div \frac{\text{amount of Ne}}{\text{time for Ne}} = \frac{\text{time for Ne}}{\text{time for Xe}} = \frac{\sqrt{\mathcal{M}_{Ne}}}{\sqrt{\mathcal{M}_{Xe}}}
\]

and substitute values:

\[
\frac{\text{time for Ne}}{243\, \text{s}} = \sqrt{\frac{20.2\, \text{g/mol}}{131.3\, \text{g/mol}}} = 0.392
\]

Finally, solve for the desired quantity:

\[
\text{time for Ne} = 0.392 \times 243\, \text{s} = 95.3\, \text{s}
\]

Note that this answer is reasonable: Since Ne is lighter than Xe, the effusion rate for Ne will be larger than that for Xe, which means the time of effusion for Ne will be smaller than that for Xe.

**Check Your Learning**  
A party balloon filled with helium deflates to $\frac{2}{3}$ of its original volume in 8.0 hours. How long will it take an identical balloon filled with the same number of moles of air ($\mathcal{M} = 28.2$ g/mol) to deflate to $\frac{1}{2}$ of its original volume?  
**Answer:** 32 h

### Example 8.22  
**Determining Molar Mass Using Graham’s Law**  
An unknown gas effuses 1.66 times more rapidly than CO$_2$. What is the molar mass of the unknown gas? Can you make a reasonable guess as to its identity?  
**Solution**  
From Graham’s law, we have:

\[
\frac{\text{rate of effusion of Unknown}}{\text{rate of effusion of CO}_2} = \frac{\sqrt{\mathcal{M}_{CO_2}}}{\sqrt{\mathcal{M}_{Unknown}}}
\]

Plug in known data:

\[
1.66 = \frac{\sqrt{44.0\, \text{g/mol}}}{\sqrt{\mathcal{M}_{Unknown}}}
\]

Solve:

\[
\mathcal{M}_{Unknown} = \frac{44.0\, \text{g/mol}}{(1.66)^2} = 16.0\, \text{g/mol}
\]

The gas could well be CH$_4$, the only gas with this molar mass.

**Check Your Learning**  
Hydrogen gas effuses through a porous container 8.97-times faster than an unknown gas. Estimate the molar mass of the unknown gas.  
**Answer:** 162 g/mol