# Lewis Acids and Bases

In 1923, G. N. Lewis proposed a generalized definition of acid-base behavior in which acids and bases are identified by their ability to accept or to donate a pair of electrons and form a coordinate covalent bond.

A coordinate covalent bond (or dative bond) occurs when one of the atoms in the bond provides both bonding electrons. For example, a coordinate covalent bond occurs when a water molecule combines with a hydrogen ion to form a hydronium ion. A coordinate covalent bond also results when an ammonia molecule combines with a hydrogen ion to form an ammonium ion.

Reactions involving the formation of coordinate covalent bonds are classified as Lewis acid-base chemistry. The species donating the electron pair that compose the bond is a Lewis base, the species accepting the electron pair is a Lewis acid, and the product of the reaction is a Lewis acid-base adduct. As the two examples above illustrate, Brønsted-Lowry acid-base reactions represent a subcategory of Lewis acid reactions, specifically, those in which the acid species is H+. A few examples involving other Lewis acids and bases are described below.

The boron atom in boron trifluoride, BF$_3$, has only six electrons in its valence shell. Being short of the preferred octet, BF$_3$ is a very good Lewis acid and reacts with many Lewis bases; a fluoride ion is the Lewis base in this reaction, donating one of its lone pairs:

In the following reaction, each of two ammonia molecules, Lewis bases, donates a pair of electrons to a silver ion, the Lewis acid:

Nonmetal oxides act as Lewis acids and react with oxide ions, Lewis bases, to form oxyanions:

Many Lewis acid-base reactions are displacement reactions in which one Lewis base displaces another Lewis base from an acid-base adduct, or in which one Lewis acid displaces another Lewis acid:

Another type of Lewis acid-base chemistry involves the formation of a complex ion (or a coordination complex) comprising a central atom, typically a transition metal cation, surrounded by ions or molecules called ligands. These ligands can be neutral molecules like H$_2$O or NH$_3$, or ions such as CN$^-$ or OH$^-$. Often, the ligands act as Lewis bases, donating a pair of electrons to the central atom. These types of Lewis acid-base reactions are examples of a broad subdiscipline called coordination chemistry—the topic of another chapter in this text.

The equilibrium constant for the reaction of a metal ion with one or more ligands to form a coordination complex is called a formation constant ($K_f$) (sometimes called a stability constant). For example, the complex ion Cu(CN)$_2^-$ is produced by the reaction

\[
\text{Cu}^+ (aq) + 2 \text{CN}^- (aq) \rightleftharpoons \text{Cu(CN)}_2^- (aq)
\]

The formation constant for this reaction is

\[
K_f = \frac{[\text{Cu(CN)}_2^-]}{[\text{Cu}^+][\text{CN}^-]^2}
\]

Alternatively, the reverse reaction (decomposition of the complex ion) can be considered, in which case the equilibrium constant is a dissociation constant ($K_d$). Per the relation between equilibrium constants for reciprocal reactions described, the dissociation constant is the mathematical inverse of the formation constant, $K_d = K_f^{-1}$. A tabulation of formation constants is provided in Appendix K.

As an example of dissolution by complex ion formation, let us consider what happens when we add aqueous ammonia to a mixture of silver chloride and water. Silver chloride dissolves slightly in water, giving a small concentration of Ag$^+$ ($[Ag^+] = 1.3 \times 10^{-5}$ M):

\[
\text{AgCl} (s) \rightleftharpoons \text{Ag}^+ (aq) + \text{Cl}^- (aq)
\]

However, if NH$_3$ is present in the water, the complex ion, Ag(NH$_3$)$_2^+$, can form according to the equation:

\[
\text{Ag}^+ (aq) + 2 \text{NH}_3 (aq) \rightleftharpoons \text{Ag(NH}_3)_2^+ (aq)
\]

with

\[
K_f = \frac{[\text{Ag(NH}_3)_2^+]}{[\text{Ag}^+][\text{NH}_3]^2} = 1.7 \times 10^7
\]

The large size of this formation constant indicates that most of the free silver ions produced by the dissolution of AgCl combine with NH$_3$ to form Ag(NH$_3$)$_2^+$. As a consequence, the concentration of silver ions, $[Ag^+]$, is reduced, and the reaction quotient for the dissolution of silver chloride, $[Ag^+][Cl^-]$, falls below the solubility product of AgCl:

\[
Q = [Ag^+][Cl^-] < K_{sp}
\]

More silver chloride then dissolves. If the concentration of ammonia is great enough, all of the silver chloride dissolves.

## Example 15.14 Dissociation of a Complex Ion

Calculate the concentration of the silver ion in a solution that initially is 0.10 M with respect to Ag(NH$_3$)$_2^+$.

**Solution**

Applying the standard ICE approach to this reaction yields the following:

This table has two main columns and four rows. The first row for the first column does not have a heading and then has the following in the first column: Initial concentration ( M ), Change ( M ), and Equilibrium concentration ( M ). The second column has the header, “A g superscript positive sign plus 2 N H subscript 3 equilibrium sign A g ( N H subscript 3 ) subscript 2 superscript positive sign.” Under the second column is a subgroup of three rows and three columns. The first column contains: 0, positive x, x. The second column contains: 0, positive 2 x, 2 x. The third column contains 0.10, negative x, and 0.10 minus x.

Substituting these equilibrium concentration terms into the $K_f$ expression gives

\[
K_f = \frac{[\text{Ag(NH}_3)_2^+]}{[\text{Ag}^+][\text{NH}_3]^2} = 1.7 \times 10^7 = \frac{0.10 - x}{x (2x)^2}
\]

The very large equilibrium constant means the amount of the complex ion that will dissociate, $x$, will be very small. Assuming $x \ll 0.1$ permits simplifying the above equation:

\[
1.7 \times 10^7 = \frac{0.10}{4x^3}
\]

\[
x^3 = \frac{0.10}{4(1.7 \times 10^7)} = 1.5 \times 10^{-9}
\]

\[
x = \sqrt[3]{1.5 \times 10^{-9}} = 1.1 \times 10^{-3}
\]

Because only 1.1% of the Ag(NH$_3$)$_2^+$ dissociates into Ag$^+$ and NH$_3$, the assumption that $x$ is small is justified.

Using this value of $x$ and the relations in the above ICE table allows calculation of all species’ equilibrium concentrations:

\[
[Ag^+] = 0 + x = 1.1 \times 10^{-3} \text{ M}
\]

\[
[NH_3] = 0 + 2x = 2.2 \times 10^{-3} \text{ M}
\]

\[
[\text{Ag(NH}_3)_2^+] = 0.10 - x = 0.10 - 0.0011 = 0.099
\]

The concentration of free silver ion in the solution is 0.0011 M.

## Check Your Learning

Calculate the silver ion concentration, $[Ag^+]$, of a solution prepared by dissolving 1.00 g of AgNO$_3$ and 10.0 g of KCN in sufficient water to make 1.00 L of solution. (Hint: Because $K_f$ is very large, the silver/cyanide complex ion (see Appendix K), assume the reaction goes to completion and then calculate the $[Ag^+]$ produced by dissociation of the complex.)

**Answer:** $2.9 \times 10^{-22}$ M